README.md, before:

# Anomaly Detection in Time Series Datasets
*authors: Dawid Sitnik, Władysław Sinkiewicz*

**File Description**

* LSTM_approach.ipynb - Jupiter notebook in which LSTM solution is made
* LSTM_approach.r - the same solution made in R with the extraction of the fragment responsible for learning LSTM network.
* yahoo_notebook.Rmd - R notebook that contains statistical methods, One-class SVM, ESD and Isolation Forests methods for time series anomaly detection.
* yahoo_notebook.html - knitted R notebook with evaluated results.

## The Aim of The Project
The main goal is to detect anomalies in the time series dataset. As the dataset, we decided to choose data shared by Yahoo called *'A Benchmark Dataset for Time Series Anomaly Detection'*, which is the real traffic data from Yahoo servers. 

The data can be accessed from this URL:
[Yahoo dataset](https://yahooresearch.tumblr.com/post/114590420346/a-benchmark-dataset-for-time-series-anomaly?fbclid=IwAR31SaUo48kFzUCeYPFDfVGRKyqYPW3vmY0XDuci7uIYM-XrrW86QXGerrY)

## Our Approach
To detect anomalies we are going to create some models which will be learned on the dataset which doesn't consist of any anomalies. Then we will make predictions on the dataset which consists also of the data with the anomaly. Assuming that our models will work properly, predictions in which values are much different than real values will be treated as anomalies.

In our project, we would like to compare classical approaches to modeling with a more modern one. The first group of solutions will be based on transforming dataset into its vector representation of time series (for example - values history for certain period with its eventual aggregation in smaller sub-windows in different variants) and then use one of the classical algorithms like linear regression, random forest classifier, etc. to create the model. In the second approach, we will use the LSTM neural network which will work only on historical values from the time series.

Eventually, we will also try to find anomalies with ESD models. This model is mostly used for forecasting, but its application can be extended to anomaly detection.

## Dataset
This dataset is provided as part of the Yahoo! Webscope program, to be used for approved non-commercial research purposes by recipients who have signed a Data Sharing Agreement with Yahoo! Dataset contains real and synthetic time-series with labeled anomalies. Timestamps are replaced by integers with an increment of 1, where each data-point represents 1 hour worth of data. The anomalies are marked by humans and therefore may not be consistent.

**The dataset fields are:**
* *timestamp*
* *value*
* *is_anomaly*
    
The is_anomaly field is a boolean indicating if the current value at a given timestamp is considered an anomaly.

**Dataset snippet:**

```
  timestamp value is_anomaly
1         1  5.86          0
2         2  5.95          0
3         3  5.92          0
4         4  5.47          0
5         5  5.77          0
6         6  5.73          0
```

The dataset before preprocessing:

![](https://imgur.com/qkjA3oo.png)

Common exploratory data analysis tools in time-series and non-time series data are histograms. We will also look at the differenced data because we want to use our timestamp (time) axis.

The histogram of untransformed data

![](https://imgur.com/M2phBfi.png)

![](https://imgur.com/ovzO405.png)


The histogram of untransformed data (top) shows normal distributions. This is to be expected given that the underlying sample (1st in our case) has no trend. If series had trend, we would difference the data to remove it, and this would transform the data to a more normal shaped distribution (bottom).

Next, we would like to know if time-series is *stationary*. We do this because many traditional statistical time series models rely on time series with such characteristics. In general, time series is *stationary* when it has fairly stable statistical properties over time, particularly mean and variance. The Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test is the most commonly used metric to access a time series for stationary problems. That test focuses on whether the mean of a series is changing, a variance isn’t tested here. 

ADF test result of one of the Yahoo time series.

```
    Augmented Dickey-Fuller Test

data:  series$value
Dickey-Fuller = -10.364, Lag order = 11, p-value = 0.01
alternative hypothesis: stationary
```

Depending on the result of the test, null hypothesis can be rejected for a specific significance level - *p*-value. Conventionally, if *p*-value is less 0.05, the time series is likely stationary, whereas a *p* > 0.05 provides no such evidence.

<!-- Common exploartory times series methods is identifying where the series has a self-correlation. Self-corelation of a time series is the idea that a value in a time series at one give point in time has a correlation to the value at another point in time. Autocorrelation on the other hand asks more general question of whether there is a correlation between two points in a specific time series with a specific fixed distance between them.

We can apply the Box-Pierce test to the data to know whether or not the data is autocorrelated.

```
    Box-Pierce test

data:  series$value
X-squared = 1128.3, df = 1, p-value < 2.2e-16
```

Same as with ADF test we can see how likely times series is autocorrelated depending on the *p*-values.

We can graph the autocorrelation function to dig further into the data.

![](https://imgur.com/kyFbXmR.png) -->


## Statistical approach

We can find anomalies in time series simply by searching for extreme values or outliers. In `Dataset` chapter we build histograms of time series values. Most of the time series had distributions close to normal. This means that we can use interquartile distance to determine the outliers.

This approach has only one parameter which is IQR coefficient. IQR coefficient determines how far away from the first and third quartile we consider time series value as an outlier. A commonly used rule is that a data point is an outlier if it is 1.5 * IQR above the third quartile or below the first quartile. Illustration of the described outliers detection method:

![](https://imgur.com/pWiSM7N.png)

Outliers found by the statistical approach:

![](https://imgur.com/XLVrwdh.png)

Confusion matrix:

![](https://imgur.com/pdcjbko.png)

Precision and recall metrics are 96.69% and 100% respectively. This means that our model is able to identify all the outliers present in the dataset, but it is correct in 96.69% of the time.

## One-class Support Vector Machine

One-class SVM is an extension of the original SVM algorithms that learns a decision boundary that tries to achieve the maximum separation between the sample of the known class and the origin. Algorithm allows only a small part of the dataset to lie on the other side of the decision boundary. These points are considered as outliers.

Kernelized SVM algorithm tries to separate two-class by first mapping instances to a high dimensional space, then it separates those instances using linear SVM within this high-dimension space. In the case of one-class SVM we have only one class of instances, this means that we try to separate instances in high-dimensional space from the origin. Looking at this from the original space perspective this will correspond to finding the smallest region that encompasses all of the instances. Instances that don't fall within this region are considered as an anomaly.

One-class SVM can only be applied to a set of vectors which means that we need to figure out how to convert time series so that it can be fed to OCSVM. We do this by unfolding the time series into a phase space using time-delay embeddings. Time series embedding vector process:

/x_E(t) = [x(t-E+1) x(x-E+2) ... x(t)]/, where /x_E(t)/ is an embedding vector at time /t/ and /E/ is *embedding dimension*.

Therefore, a time series can be converted to a set of vectors /T_E(N)=\x_E(t), t=E ... N}/.

After converting a time-series into a set of vectors we run OCSVM algorithm on them. If algorithm suggests that embedding vector /x_E(t)/ is an outlier all points from this embedding at set 1(this marks time-series values as an outlier in times series data frame).

We set *embeding dimesions* to 5 as it gives an optimistic trade-off between detection rate and false alarm.

Last hyperparameter that we consider is /nu/. It is a regularization parameter of SVM algorithm and it can be interpreted as an upper bound on the fraction of margin errors and a lower bound of the fraction of support vectors relative to the number of training examples. We set this parameter to 1% as we expect a fairly small number of outliers in the time-series.

As a kernel to one-class SVM we set RBF function as it makes a good default kernel to non-linear problems. Some papers suggest that RBF kernel performs very well on different types of times series and learning tasks, it still a good practice to practice to pay a closer look at the times series with specialized applications as other kernel functions could have a better performance.

Outliers detected by One-class SVM:

![](https://imgur.com/HwL3zRv.png)

Confusion matrix:

![](https://imgur.com/JdzheZZ.png)

Precision of the OCSVM is 100%, recall - 98.66%. Compared to shallow statistical approach OCSVM algorithm is correct in more cases. These results are easy to explain as OCSVM is much more complex and robust algorithm which combined with embedding space can be applied to time-series.

## Seasonal Hybrid ESD Model

Season Hybrid ESD (Extreme Studentized Deviant) is well known method for identifying anomalies in times series which remains useful and well-performing. Season Hybrid ESD is built on a statistical test, the *Grubbs test*, which defines a statistic for testing the hypothesis that there is a single outlier in a dataset. The ESD applies this test repeatedly, first to the most extreme outlier and then to the smaller outliers. ESD also accounts for seasonality in behavior via time series decomposition.

Visualization of anomalies found by ESD model:

![](https://imgur.com/WT4kzGW.png)

Confusion matrix:

![](https://imgur.com/qvQHxzB.png)

Precision of the ESD model - 100%, recall - 98.52%.

## Isolation forests

Isolation Forest is a variation of Random Forest algorithm which creates random trees until each value is in separate leaf. This random partitioning crates much shorter paths for novelties because instances with distinguishable are mote likely to be separated in the early stages of the partitioning. Therefore, when random forests produce shorter paths for some values, then this value can be considered as an anomaly. We decide whether or value is an anomaly or not based on the mean of the depth of the leaves. 

Visualization that demonstrates the idea that anomalies are separated in early stages of the Isolation Forest under random partitioning:

![](https://imgur.com/k5O3yZj.png)

Outliers detected by the Isolation forest algorithm:

![](https://imgur.com/M0jSZNl.png)

Confusion matrix:

![](https://imgur.com/VK5Ng3Y.png)

Precision of the Isolation Forests approach is 100%, recall - 99.71%.

## LSTM Neural Network Approach

A powerful type of neural network designed to handle sequence dependence is called recurrent neural networks. The Long Short-Term Memory network or LSTM network is a type of recurrent neural network used in deep learning because very large architectures can be successfully trained.

Before feeding the network with the data we needed to extend our dataset by assigning new attributes to each value. The new attributes are previous values of time series, so for value recorded at time t, we extended it of values from t-1, t-2 ... t-n. In this case, we got a data frame of size (initial length of data frame x n). We couldn't create all of the attributes for last n observations from each sub dataset so we decided to not include them in our training dataset. 

#### Data Preprocessing
Before feeding the network with data we should preprocess our data. The first thing which comes to the mind is to detect trends and seasonality and delete it from the signal. However, in this case, there was no seasonality nor trend. Then we checked if the data doesn't contain any null values and outliers, but fortunately, it didn't.

Another thing which can be done is data normalization. In our purpose we decided to normalize our data due to this formule:
```
df = (df - df.mean()) / (df.max() - df.min())
```

As we can see, our signal is quite complex - it changes its values drastically, so we also have tried to smooth it a little bit using a rolling window technique trying different values of the window. The window size which gave us the best result was 5.

The preprocessed signal can be seen in the picture below:

![](https://imgur.com/oSG2zG7.png)

So finally description of our data is:

![](https://imgur.com/BMTJWsV.png)

Because of the LSTM neural network nature, we had to reshape our data one more time to get its final dimension equal to (initial length of data frame x n x 1). It had to be done because those types of networks operate only on 3D vectors. The fraction of the training dataset can be seen in the picture.

![](https://imgur.com/kT1A5pH.png)

The final architecture of the LSTM NN looks like:

![](https://imgur.com/oK2PkrI.png")

![](https://imgur.com/kT1A5pH.png)

Its graphical ilustration can be seen below:

![](https://imgur.com/339bam0.png")

#### Solution
We repeated the learning process many times, trying different sizes of:
* n - attributes which were value from the previous timestep
* window size for smoothing the signal
* epochs 

The best-obtained result was for:
* lookback n = 5
* smoothing window size = 5
* 20 epochs

The learning process of network can be seen here:

![](https://imgur.com/59ARm9m.png")


Signal prediction on training dataset:

![](https://imgur.com/WbhzOD0.png")



Signal prediction on testing dataset:

![](https://imgur.com/Dx0f3ja.png")


The model isn't overtrained, as it can be seen at the pictures, signal predicted basing on the test dataset is as good as the one predicted on the training dataset.

Then, to point the anomalies we tried to find the threshold which is the absolute value of the difference between real and predicted values. To do that we split our results into two groups - anomaly data and normal data. The summarize of absolute errors for each group can be seen at the picture:

group without anomalies

![](https://imgur.com/4HMz185.png")


group with anomalies

![](https://imgur.com/rwVLJJg.png")

The max error for the group without anomalies equals to 0.151 when min error for a group with anomalies is 0.1639. It means, that we can easily split the difference between those two groups if we choose a tolerated error threshold sensibly.

The threshold value set to differentiate groups correctly is *12 * (standard deviation of the whole dataset)* what equals to 1.559.

## Summary

The LSTM experiment proves that we can use deep neural network for anomaly prediction also. Even though it is not the classical approach for anomaly detection it works properly as well. 

If we would like to use this approach for different dataset we would probably have to change a threshold value. It could be done automatically by the function which minimizes F1 value and takes treshold as the parameter. 

As a baseline we used interquartile distance with coefficient 1.5. This gives as a solid yet simple method for novelty detection. Accuracy of IQR approach was quite high, thus improving it could be a challenging task.

One-class Support Vector Machine improved recall of anomaly detection by 2%. This is a rather high improvement as our statistical approach is already pretty good at finding anomalies. SVM is a more sophisticated algorithm and it is extensively used in classification and regression tasks because of its high accuracy and clear interpretation.

Another machine learning algorithm that we used to identify time-series anomalies is Isolation Forest. It provides the best overall performance among methods that aren't based on deep learning. Algorithm is easily interpretable, doesn't require much of preprocessing steps, and is designed specifically for detecting anomalies. Isolation Forest doesn't have major drawbacks which makes it one of the most preferable choices in our task.

Commit message:

F1 score of the models. Explaining metric choice

README.md, after:

# Anomaly Detection in Time Series Datasets
*authors: Dawid Sitnik, Władysław Sinkiewicz*

**File Description**

* LSTM_approach.ipynb - Jupiter notebook in which LSTM solution is made
* LSTM_approach.r - the same solution made in R with the extraction of the fragment responsible for learning LSTM network.
* yahoo_notebook.Rmd - R notebook that contains statistical methods, One-class SVM, ESD and Isolation Forests methods for time series anomaly detection.
* yahoo_notebook.html - knitted R notebook with evaluated results.

## The Aim of The Project
The main goal is to detect anomalies in the time series dataset. As the dataset, we decided to choose data shared by Yahoo called *'A Benchmark Dataset for Time Series Anomaly Detection'*, which is the real traffic data from Yahoo servers. 

The data can be accessed from this URL:
[Yahoo dataset](https://yahooresearch.tumblr.com/post/114590420346/a-benchmark-dataset-for-time-series-anomaly?fbclid=IwAR31SaUo48kFzUCeYPFDfVGRKyqYPW3vmY0XDuci7uIYM-XrrW86QXGerrY)

## Our Approach
To detect anomalies we are going to create some models which will be learned on the dataset which doesn't consist of any anomalies. Then we will make predictions on the dataset which consists also of the data with the anomaly. Assuming that our models will work properly, predictions in which values are much different than real values will be treated as anomalies.

In our project, we would like to compare classical approaches to modeling with a more modern one. The first group of solutions will be based on transforming dataset into its vector representation of time series (for example - values history for certain period with its eventual aggregation in smaller sub-windows in different variants) and then use one of the classical algorithms like linear regression, random forest classifier, etc. to create the model. In the second approach, we will use the LSTM neural network which will work only on historical values from the time series.

Eventually, we will also try to find anomalies with ESD models. This model is mostly used for forecasting, but its application can be extended to anomaly detection.

## Dataset
This dataset is provided as part of the Yahoo! Webscope program, to be used for approved non-commercial research purposes by recipients who have signed a Data Sharing Agreement with Yahoo! Dataset contains real and synthetic time-series with labeled anomalies. Timestamps are replaced by integers with an increment of 1, where each data-point represents 1 hour worth of data. The anomalies are marked by humans and therefore may not be consistent.

**The dataset fields are:**
* *timestamp*
* *value*
* *is_anomaly*
    
The is_anomaly field is a boolean indicating if the current value at a given timestamp is considered an anomaly.

**Dataset snippet:**

```
  timestamp value is_anomaly
1         1  5.86          0
2         2  5.95          0
3         3  5.92          0
4         4  5.47          0
5         5  5.77          0
6         6  5.73          0
```

The dataset before preprocessing:

![](https://imgur.com/qkjA3oo.png)

Common exploratory data analysis tools in time-series and non-time series data are histograms. We will also look at the differenced data because we want to use our timestamp (time) axis.

The histogram of untransformed data

![](https://imgur.com/M2phBfi.png)

![](https://imgur.com/ovzO405.png)


The histogram of untransformed data (top) shows normal distributions. This is to be expected given that the underlying sample (1st in our case) has no trend. If series had trend, we would difference the data to remove it, and this would transform the data to a more normal shaped distribution (bottom).

Next, we would like to know if time-series is *stationary*. We do this because many traditional statistical time series models rely on time series with such characteristics. In general, time series is *stationary* when it has fairly stable statistical properties over time, particularly mean and variance. The Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test is the most commonly used metric to access a time series for stationary problems. That test focuses on whether the mean of a series is changing, a variance isn’t tested here. 

ADF test result of one of the Yahoo time series.

```
    Augmented Dickey-Fuller Test

data:  series$value
Dickey-Fuller = -10.364, Lag order = 11, p-value = 0.01
alternative hypothesis: stationary
```

Depending on the result of the test, null hypothesis can be rejected for a specific significance level - *p*-value. Conventionally, if *p*-value is less 0.05, the time series is likely stationary, whereas a *p* > 0.05 provides no such evidence.

<!-- Common exploartory times series methods is identifying where the series has a self-correlation. Self-corelation of a time series is the idea that a value in a time series at one give point in time has a correlation to the value at another point in time. Autocorrelation on the other hand asks more general question of whether there is a correlation between two points in a specific time series with a specific fixed distance between them.

We can apply the Box-Pierce test to the data to know whether or not the data is autocorrelated.

```
    Box-Pierce test

data:  series$value
X-squared = 1128.3, df = 1, p-value < 2.2e-16
```

Same as with ADF test we can see how likely times series is autocorrelated depending on the *p*-values.

We can graph the autocorrelation function to dig further into the data.

![](https://imgur.com/kyFbXmR.png) -->


## Statistical approach

We can find anomalies in time series simply by searching for extreme values or outliers. In `Dataset` chapter we build histograms of time series values. Most of the time series had distributions close to normal. This means that we can use interquartile distance to determine the outliers.

This approach has only one parameter which is IQR coefficient. IQR coefficient determines how far away from the first and third quartile we consider time series value as an outlier. A commonly used rule is that a data point is an outlier if it is 1.5 * IQR above the third quartile or below the first quartile. Illustration of the described outliers detection method:

![](https://imgur.com/pWiSM7N.png)

Outliers found by the statistical approach:

![](https://imgur.com/XLVrwdh.png)

Confusion matrix:

![](https://imgur.com/pdcjbko.png)

F1 score of the model - 98.31%. Precision and recall metrics are 96.69% and 100% respectively. This means that our model is able to identify all the outliers present in the dataset, but it is correct in 96.69% of the time.

We also compute the F1 score to evalue model performance. This score is often more convenient as it combines precision and recall into single metric, thus it is a simpler way to compare models. F1 score is a harmonic mean of the precisiona and recall, harmonic mean gives much more weight to to low values, therefore we will get high F1 score only if precision and recall are high.

It is a topic of discussion whether this metric will be useful in production in our case as it favors classifiers with similar precision and recall. In our task we work with anomaly detection on an anonymized dataset and we don't know what kind of anomalies we look at. There could be cases that we want to identify all anomalies(high precisions) sacrificing recall. For example anomalies could mean vital health parameter anomalies of which will result in the certain death of the person.

## One-class Support Vector Machine

One-class SVM is an extension of the original SVM algorithms that learns a decision boundary that tries to achieve the maximum separation between the sample of the known class and the origin. Algorithm allows only a small part of the dataset to lie on the other side of the decision boundary. These points are considered as outliers.

Kernelized SVM algorithm tries to separate two-class by first mapping instances to a high dimensional space, then it separates those instances using linear SVM within this high-dimension space. In the case of one-class SVM we have only one class of instances, this means that we try to separate instances in high-dimensional space from the origin. Looking at this from the original space perspective this will correspond to finding the smallest region that encompasses all of the instances. Instances that don't fall within this region are considered as an anomaly.

One-class SVM can only be applied to a set of vectors which means that we need to figure out how to convert time series so that it can be fed to OCSVM. We do this by unfolding the time series into a phase space using time-delay embeddings. Time series embedding vector process:

/x_E(t) = [x(t-E+1) x(x-E+2) ... x(t)]/, where /x_E(t)/ is an embedding vector at time /t/ and /E/ is *embedding dimension*.

Therefore, a time series can be converted to a set of vectors /T_E(N)=\x_E(t), t=E ... N}/.

After converting a time-series into a set of vectors we run OCSVM algorithm on them. If algorithm suggests that embedding vector /x_E(t)/ is an outlier all points from this embedding at set 1(this marks time-series values as an outlier in times series data frame).

We set *embeding dimesions* to 5 as it gives an optimistic trade-off between detection rate and false alarm.

Last hyperparameter that we consider is /nu/. It is a regularization parameter of SVM algorithm and it can be interpreted as an upper bound on the fraction of margin errors and a lower bound of the fraction of support vectors relative to the number of training examples. We set this parameter to 1% as we expect a fairly small number of outliers in the time-series.

As a kernel to one-class SVM we set RBF function as it makes a good default kernel to non-linear problems. Some papers suggest that RBF kernel performs very well on different types of times series and learning tasks, it still a good practice to practice to pay a closer look at the times series with specialized applications as other kernel functions could have a better performance.

Outliers detected by One-class SVM:

![](https://imgur.com/HwL3zRv.png)

Confusion matrix:

![](https://imgur.com/JdzheZZ.png)

F1 score of the model - 98.66%. Precision of the OCSVM is 100%, recall - 98.66%. Compared to shallow statistical approach OCSVM algorithm is correct in more cases. These results are easy to explain as OCSVM is much more complex and robust algorithm which combined with embedding space can be applied to time-series.

## Seasonal Hybrid ESD Model

Season Hybrid ESD (Extreme Studentized Deviant) is well known method for identifying anomalies in times series which remains useful and well-performing. Season Hybrid ESD is built on a statistical test, the *Grubbs test*, which defines a statistic for testing the hypothesis that there is a single outlier in a dataset. The ESD applies this test repeatedly, first to the most extreme outlier and then to the smaller outliers. ESD also accounts for seasonality in behavior via time series decomposition.

Visualization of anomalies found by ESD model:

![](https://imgur.com/WT4kzGW.png)

Confusion matrix:

![](https://imgur.com/qvQHxzB.png)

F1 score - 99.25%. Precision of the ESD model - 100%, recall - 98.52%.

## Isolation forests

Isolation Forest is a variation of Random Forest algorithm which creates random trees until each value is in separate leaf. This random partitioning crates much shorter paths for novelties because instances with distinguishable are mote likely to be separated in the early stages of the partitioning. Therefore, when random forests produce shorter paths for some values, then this value can be considered as an anomaly. We decide whether or value is an anomaly or not based on the mean of the depth of the leaves. 

Visualization that demonstrates the idea that anomalies are separated in early stages of the Isolation Forest under random partitioning:

![](https://imgur.com/k5O3yZj.png)

Outliers detected by the Isolation forest algorithm:

![](https://imgur.com/M0jSZNl.png)

Confusion matrix:

![](https://imgur.com/VK5Ng3Y.png)

F1 score of EDS approach - 99.85%. Precision of the Isolation Forests approach is 100%, recall - 99.71%.

## LSTM Neural Network Approach

A powerful type of neural network designed to handle sequence dependence is called recurrent neural networks. The Long Short-Term Memory network or LSTM network is a type of recurrent neural network used in deep learning because very large architectures can be successfully trained.

Before feeding the network with the data we needed to extend our dataset by assigning new attributes to each value. The new attributes are previous values of time series, so for value recorded at time t, we extended it of values from t-1, t-2 ... t-n. In this case, we got a data frame of size (initial length of data frame x n). We couldn't create all of the attributes for last n observations from each sub dataset so we decided to not include them in our training dataset. 

#### Data Preprocessing
Before feeding the network with data we should preprocess our data. The first thing which comes to the mind is to detect trends and seasonality and delete it from the signal. However, in this case, there was no seasonality nor trend. Then we checked if the data doesn't contain any null values and outliers, but fortunately, it didn't.

Another thing which can be done is data normalization. In our purpose we decided to normalize our data due to this formule:
```
df = (df - df.mean()) / (df.max() - df.min())
```

As we can see, our signal is quite complex - it changes its values drastically, so we also have tried to smooth it a little bit using a rolling window technique trying different values of the window. The window size which gave us the best result was 5.

The preprocessed signal can be seen in the picture below:

![](https://imgur.com/oSG2zG7.png)

So finally description of our data is:

![](https://imgur.com/BMTJWsV.png)

Because of the LSTM neural network nature, we had to reshape our data one more time to get its final dimension equal to (initial length of data frame x n x 1). It had to be done because those types of networks operate only on 3D vectors. The fraction of the training dataset can be seen in the picture.

![](https://imgur.com/kT1A5pH.png)

The final architecture of the LSTM NN looks like:

![](https://imgur.com/oK2PkrI.png")

![](https://imgur.com/kT1A5pH.png)

Its graphical ilustration can be seen below:

![](https://imgur.com/339bam0.png")

#### Solution
We repeated the learning process many times, trying different sizes of:
* n - attributes which were value from the previous timestep
* window size for smoothing the signal
* epochs 

The best-obtained result was for:
* lookback n = 5
* smoothing window size = 5
* 20 epochs

The learning process of network can be seen here:

![](https://imgur.com/59ARm9m.png")


Signal prediction on training dataset:

![](https://imgur.com/WbhzOD0.png")



Signal prediction on testing dataset:

![](https://imgur.com/Dx0f3ja.png")


The model isn't overtrained, as it can be seen at the pictures, signal predicted basing on the test dataset is as good as the one predicted on the training dataset.

Then, to point the anomalies we tried to find the threshold which is the absolute value of the difference between real and predicted values. To do that we split our results into two groups - anomaly data and normal data. The summarize of absolute errors for each group can be seen at the picture:

group without anomalies

![](https://imgur.com/4HMz185.png")


group with anomalies

![](https://imgur.com/rwVLJJg.png")

The max error for the group without anomalies equals to 0.151 when min error for a group with anomalies is 0.1639. It means, that we can easily split the difference between those two groups if we choose a tolerated error threshold sensibly.

The threshold value set to differentiate groups correctly is *12 * (standard deviation of the whole dataset)* what equals to 1.559.

## Summary

The LSTM experiment proves that we can use deep neural network for anomaly prediction also. Even though it is not the classical approach for anomaly detection it works properly as well. 

If we would like to use this approach for different dataset we would probably have to change a threshold value. It could be done automatically by the function which minimizes F1 value and takes treshold as the parameter. 

As a baseline we used interquartile distance with coefficient 1.5. This gives as a solid yet simple method for novelty detection. Accuracy of IQR approach was quite high, thus improving it could be a challenging task.

One-class Support Vector Machine improved recall of anomaly detection by 2%. This is a rather high improvement as our statistical approach is already pretty good at finding anomalies. SVM is a more sophisticated algorithm and it is extensively used in classification and regression tasks because of its high accuracy and clear interpretation.

Another machine learning algorithm that we used to identify time-series anomalies is Isolation Forest. It provides the best overall performance among methods that aren't based on deep learning. Algorithm is easily interpretable, doesn't require much of preprocessing steps, and is designed specifically for detecting anomalies. Isolation Forest doesn't have major drawbacks which makes it one of the most preferable choices in our task.
